-- 23 July --
== A sea otter surprise in Windsor Great Park ==
A sunny day, and I get the train to Reading on time. The connection to
Egham is cancelled, but the next one is only 20 minutes later. Its an
empty commuter train to heading to Waterloo to pick up office workers.
<p>
Arrive at Egham. Town seems more pedestrianised than I
remember. There's a new road or two. I find the back road up to
college again. There are new accommodation buildings and I find my way
round them to the reception office. There's a Canadian marching band
heading into Athlone Hall. Luckily I don't have to queue behind all 200
of them.
<p>
I get my room key, number X11 in one of the new blocks close to my old
residence in Williamson House. A small room with a TV, a shower/toilet
in a corner cubicle, and the usual student room fixtures and fittings.
<p>
Walk round campus a bit - physics has moved out of the old building. I
cross the A30 and head for Windsor Great Park. My old favourite tree
seems to have gone. I sit by the lake and have some food, watch
birds. Walk up to the totem pole - a gift from Canadian pacific coast
natives to the queen - and there's a sea otter half way up
it. Smiling, I head back to college and bed.

-- 24 July --
== Across the Atlantic and sleeping in Seattle == 
Get up at 7.30 and have breakfast in the kitchen. The drivers from the
marching band are there - they sound Dutch or German. I head for the
bus stop to catch the 8:41 bus to the airport, aware that the woman at
reception had told me that they weren't that reliable, and I decide
I'll get a taxi if its not there by 9:15. It's only 12 minutes late
when it arrives.
<p>
I nearly leave my hat on the bus at the airport, but the bloke behind
me picks it up and returns it. I head for terminal 4. I'm very early,
so I wander around a bit, take some video footage. Check in, and then
I'm through security and on the plane. Next to me is a couple from
Newcastle-Upon-Tyne who used to live in Botswana. The flight is the
usual dullness, except when I look up and see a radio telescope on the
screen. Its a film called 'The Dish' about the radio telescope that
received the first TV transmissions from Apollo 11 on the moon. Its
quite funny, especially in the Australian depiction of the US
people. A strange choice for a flight to the states.
<p>
Arrive at Seattle Airport on time - its 3pm or so. I get my luggage
and head or customs. Bloke there checks my boots for foot-n-mouth
infected mud and asks where I've been walking. He seems happy with
them and lets me through. Also in the queue was a bunch of girls who
are returning from a soccer tour of Europe, and are worried that they
will all have to dig their muddy boots out of their bags for
inspection.
<p>
Immigrations is straight through, and then a small shuttle bus takes
me to the main terminal. I find some US currency and stick a couple of
quarters in the phone and call Dave Smith. I get his answering machine
and leave a message. A little while later I try again. Same
message. Then I wait a while and try yet again. This time the message
has changed to tell me that he's on his way. Shortly after he appears
at the baggage carousel (not down the conveyor belt). We head off to
the garage and drive back to his flat just out of downtown Seattle. I
check my email and sleep on the couch.

-- 25 July --
== Exploring Seattle and a Goth experience ==
Dave leaves me a map and house keys and goes off to work. I have
trouble finding my way out of the house and have to ask
directions. I'm on the wrong floor.
<p>
I decide to explore downtown, but first head out to the local
supermarket and get some snacks. I then follow the map to the sea-front
and the Pike Place market - a semi-open-air market selling all sorts of
stuff - fruit, vegetables, fish, meat, clothes, gifts etc. Then
there's a whole load more shops inside selling gifts and other
interesting items. I can't find anywhere in town that sells mini-DV
tapes - Radio Shack don't, Office World don't.
<p>
I'm also looking for rubber boots - wellies to us - so look round the
gigantic REI store. It's huge, but the shoe dept is very busy. I walk
back to Dave's place and find my way in no problem.
<p>
I watch TV for a while - Dave has cable so no shortage of channels -
and then he gets home. I phone Dave Howes (DH) in Tacoma, and he heads
over. We go to a Thai place near Dave Smith's (DS) flat. Good hot
food. Then DS leads us to a dark, quiet, empty bar where we are
stamped with the word 'GOTH' on our hands after paying the $3 entry
charge. The place is appropriately dead.

-- 26 July --
== Sea Otters in the Aquarium ==
On the way to the bar last night I spotted an army surplus store. I
return to it first thing this morning and find some well-fitting
wellies. I drop them back at Dave's and go downtown. I find Ken's
Cameras, hoping it has some DV tapes, but it's closed because of some
power cut problem. Great.
<p>There's an
aquarium down on the waterfront - Seattle Aquarium no less. I go in
and head straight for the sea otters. There's four in a tank, just
floating there and enjoying the sun. One of the adults is holding
hands with one of the juveniles and everyone is just melting when they
notice. How many other furry animals hold hands like that?
<p>
There's also river otters, northern fur seals, harbour seals, octopus,
various fish, anemones, shellfish etc. Its now feeding time for the
fish in the big dome. Two divers are distributing fish food and the
dome is full of excited children.
<p>
I head back to the sea otters for their feeding time. They've woken up
a bit from earlier and are now swimming around and grooming. The two
adult otters are clearly different sexes, and we get a close up view
of the mating behaviour of the sea otter. Junior just rolls around in
a corner.
<p>
Two aquarium staff turn up and throw scraps for the sea otters. One of
them gets out and wobbles around a bit on land - it doesn't look very
happy - and plops back in again. It then tries to chew the base of the
pole belonging to a net that one of the staff has. Next to the tank is
a staff member with a table of furs. The sea otter fur feels so much
softer than anything else, and the value of its pelt is suddenly
apparent. 
<p>
After a while wandering around the aquarium, I find my way back to
Dave's flat. When he gets home he says we're off to see a friend of
his who is visiting Seattle for a while. We grab some Mexican take-out
and then get hopelessly lost trying to find where Cindy is
staying. After phoning her for directions we finally get there. It's a
beautiful large house with a balcony overlooking Lake Washington where
we sit and drink and eat. Cindy's daughter has some friends over and
we hear them splashing around in the big hot tub. We chat until it
gets dark and then go home.

-- 27 July --
== Shopping in Seattle ==
I find Ken's Cameras open this morning and buy 10 DV tapes, and I get
them for the price of 9. I then spend a few minutes with some scissors
taking all the tapes out of their monstrous packaging.
<p>
I wander all along the waterfront and up the the Seattle Center - site
of a world's fair and the space needle. It's a bit busy and also quite
cloudy and hazy so I skip the needle and just relax in the park.
<p>
I walk back into town, following the line of the monorail that was
built to take people to the World's Fair. Once back among the tower
blocks I take a whole lot of video famous brand names for a music
video I want to film. I wander round a small mall taking shots of all
the prestigious brand names.
<p>
In the evening DH turns up and the 3 of us drive off and pick up
Geoff, then we head to the George and Dragon where I have a cheese
sandwich and chips. The place sells English beer and is full of
non-americans.

-- 28 July --
== Volcanoes in the mist ==
We had planned to go with DH to Mount St Helens, but he is busy moving
a sofa for a friend, so its just me and DS. It's cloudy and grey, so
we can't see much in the distance, but still we can see the effect of
the blast - trees are missing, the valley bottom is full of mud. We
arrive at the Johnston Ridge visitor centre and watch a USGS scientist
presenting some results on measurements of the Cascade mountains. Then
we stay in the theatre to watch a presentation of the explosion. The
film ends, and the screen rises and the curtain opens to reveal a
window looking out on a grey mist. 
<p>
We wander around a bit, look at the exhibits, and wander up the
tracks. The cloud isn't budging, if anything it is getting worse.
<p>
Then we drive off to the Coldwater Lake visitor centre. Here they
concentrate on the biology of the place, and how animals and plants
are recovering after the eruption. A few ground squirrels are seen
running around. We wait and hope for the clouds to lift, but they don't
- they just give us tantalising views of the mud-filled valley bottom.
Eventually we give up and head home.
<p>
Since we are passing through Tacoma, we stop and phone DH. No
answer. We stop in Tacoma and phone again. Still no answer. So we give
up and head back to Seattle. From there we phone him and it turns out
we just missed him.
<p>
DS and I go to a veggie restaurant for dinner - spring rolls and
tacos. Then back at Dave's I pack everything into my bags ready for
the journey to Alaska tomorrow. I've added new boots and a bunch of DV
tapes to my luggage. It all just about goes in. I read a few more
stories about the US in a Bill Bryson book and go to sleep.

-- 29 July --
== Off to Alaska and the great rendezvous ==
I get up at 6 and pack my sleeping and wash gear. At 6.30 Dave gets up
and we drive to the airport. Check in and boarding go okay, but I have
to change seats at Yakutat! The views are stunning - mountains,
glaciers, ocean. The plane stops at Juneau and Yakutat before arriving
at Cordova on time. The airport is one small building. I film the
plane leaving and watch a few small aircraft come and go.
<p>
I sit down at the River Rafter's Lodge which is the rendezvous, but of
course I am four hours early. So I sit and wait and watch the planes
arriving, the flowers waving in the wind, and the insects buzzing
round the flowers. The sun shines for a bit, and it rains a bit
too. Not too bad.
<p>
At 3.30 Bruce arrives. He unloads all his bags from the hired car he
has and takes it back to the rental shack. He then shows me some
photographs he has taken on other trips - tigers, big cats, whales. We
talk for a while as we wait for the plane to arrive.
<p>
The Alaska Air 737 returns so I go and stand in the lobby with a big
Earthwatch tag sticking out of my top pocket. First to spot me is
Laura-Lee. Then Laura notices it. Then Jim says hi. No sign of Diane,
so we head back to the lodge and Diane is just ahead of us. We're all
together for the first time so its greetings all round.
<p>
We wait for someone to meet us. For a while. At 5.15 Bruce heads off
to the car rental shop. He comes back, and tells us that he's found
out that Cordova Air are expecting us by 6 o'clock. At 5.30 Bruce's
impatience gets the better of him and he goes to find out what's
happening. He returns to tell us that Robyn has forgotten that she has
to pick us up, and is rushing out to get us.
<p>
Robyn arrives shortly afterwards and we all pile into the big old bus
and start the journey to the lake. She tells us a bit about the
history of the Copper River Delta and something about the
wildlife. Its now raining quite heavily. We get to Lake Eyak and the
rain is easing off slightly. I throw my gear into a plane with the two
Lauras and the others jump into the next plane. Our pilot seems
slightly eccentric, but that's what I'd expect from an Alaskan bush
pilot. We accelerate off and then we're in the air. I can see the
other plane taking off beside us, but there's not much of a view out
of the front. 
<p>
We do a big left turn and head back over the bus. Then we cross
Cordova harbour and out across the ocean. A short hop over a small
island brings us to Simpson Bay, and we make a soft landing and then
both the planes cruise into Alice Cove. We hit the beach and jump out,
where we're greeted by Randall, Fred, Lori and Rebecca.
<p>
First thing to arrange is the accommodation. There's a tent for two and
a tent for four, and we are three guys and three girls. Randall makes
an executive decision to put me in the tent with the three girls - I'm
not complaining. Bruce and Jim have the small tent on the left, and
the four of us are in the bigger tent on the right. We jump in and
grab a bunk each. Randall shows us the facilities - heater, water. 
I pop over to the guys' tent to see how much room they have. Not a lot
it seems!
<p>
We head up to Fred's cabin. This is where Randall, Lori, and Rebecca
sleep. Fred has been evicted and spends nights on his boat, the
Dancing Bear, moored just out in the Cove. Rebecca and Lori have
prepared some snacks and dinner, which we eat and then head back down
to the beach to sort out our sleeping bags and gear and settle down
for a night's sleep.

-- 30 July --
== Otters, eagles, bears and salmon ==
I wake up at about 6:15 and its still light - I don't recall it ever
getting dark. I crawl out of my sleeping bag at 7:45 and there's an
otter in the Cove. Jim and Bruce are up watching it. It's the first
one we've seen. There are also eagles flying around, and fish
jumping. It's raining slightly, and there's still a lot of low cloud
around.  Once everyone is up, we head up to the cabin for breakfast -
there's cereals and toast and other goodies. 
<p>
Randall tries to show us a presentation on the computer but the
projector blows a lamp. Instead we have to all try and look at the
laptop screen. Its just the outline of the project, pretty much what
we should have all read in the project briefing. Then its down to the
beach for equipment and safety demos. We're shown how the various bits
of kit operate - the GPS, the VHF radios, the drop camera, the Eckman
grab, the laser binoculars.  Once that's done its already time for
lunch up at the cabin.
<p>
 After that we head out on the boats. There are
two craft we are using for the trip. One is a wooden skiff with a
pointed bow, which was built by Fred in the cabin. He normally goes
out in this one. The other is a plastic or fibre-glass boat referred
to as the Boston Whaler - that's the manufacturer. I think you'd have
trouble catching whales in it. Randall prefers this craft, probably
because it has a much larger engine and flies through the water.
<p>
We head up the left arm of Simpson Bay - and there are otters all over
the water. We also spot a brown bear on a small island. There are bald
eagles sitting in seemingly every other tree. Quite a few of
the otters are mothers with small pups, and we stop next to one as she
feeds and grooms it for half an hour. Other otters are less tolerant,
and dive off as we approach.
<p>
There are some harbour seals hauled out of the water, sitting on
rocks. As we get closer they become agitated, and eventually slope off
into the water. Jellyfish drift past the boat. Salmon jump.
<p>
We land the boats on some mudflats for a look around. It has quite a
smell to it. Then its across the bay to a small waterfall, where
there's plenty of sign of bears feeding on the local berries. A short
scramble up the stream leads to a larger waterfall. 
<p>
By now its nearly dinner time, so we zoom back to camp and eat. I talk
to Randall about some statistical analysis he is doing with some
Weddell seal skull measurements. Soon its bedtime.

-- 31 July --
== Down to work - dropping the camera, and a little light music. ==
There's a lot of rain during the night. It's still raining by morning.
The cloud has lifted a bit and now we can see a bit more of the
mountains across the bay. Up to the cabin for breakfast.
<p>
Randall divides us into two teams for the work. LauraLee, Bruce and
myself are one team, Laura, Jim and Diane make up the other. Today
we're working with Fred in the skiff doing bottom camera data
collecting, and the others are out in the whaler with Randall doing
the photo-identification and otter behaviour study.
<p>
On the way out to the survey site, Fred spots a black bear on the
shore. We watch it spot us and disappear into the trees.
<p>
Once we get to the station marked on the chart we lower the camera
into the water. Its a small black-and-white camera attached to a metal
plate together with a battery-powered torchlight for illumination. The
plate is lowered on a rope and a cable brings back the camera
picture. This is plugged into a box on the boat which holds the
electronics and the screen. A fabric hood over the screen lets the
viewer see what's going on in bright light.
<p>
We all take turns hauling the camera up and down together with coiling
the cable carefully and looking at the screen. We see mostly mud but
there are some odd little creatures and encrustations on the
sea-bottom. For some reason I seem to describe them all in terms of
food - small holes surrounded by debris look to me like bagels or
doughnuts, mud has the texture of orange peel, and some seaweed looks
a lot like cabbage. There are also these amazing feathery sea pens
that sprout up from the mud.
<p>
We hear on the radio from Randall that they've been following an otter
for for a while, and they want to know what sort of surface its been
diving to. We head over and take a look at the bottom. Its soon
lunchtime so back to the camp where Randall fries up some beans to
make some burritos. He likes his hot food.
<p>
There's much discussion between Randall and Fred about what to do in
the afternoon. Eventually its decided we should do some more
investigation of the bottom where the otter was doing dives up to four
minutes. Once we get out there Fred's depth-finder tells us its 70
metres deep. That's at the limit of the camera cable length, and quite
a long haul to get the camera up. The light fails on the camera, so we
replace the battery. Fred's depth-finder fails and he can't fix it
there and then. It's now time to get back to camp.
<p>
We clean up the equipment and return to the cabin for dinner. It's our
group's turn to help with the cooking and cleaning. 
<p>
Fred's parents, Barney and Maxine, turn up. They are staying in the
cabin across the cove for a while. It beats Los Angeles, I guess. 
<p>
After dinner, Fred is encouraged to get his guitars from the Dancing
Bear and he and I go over and pick up 2 guitars, an amp, and a
mixer. We set it all up in the cabin and play a few songs for the
audience, with limited audience participation. We get to bed about 11.

-- 1 Aug --
== Shooting the Sea Otters ==
We all get up at the usual time and have breakfast. Today we're on the
boat with Randall. I'm on the radar binoculars, counting the distance
to the otters as they are photographed. It's a beautiful sunny day. We
track a couple of male otters and photograph them. Lunchtime arrives
quickly so we head back to camp. After eating we head off and follow
some more otters. Bruce sits at the front of the boat spotting them,
and then Randall gets ready with the camera as we approach. I get a
fix with the binoculars as Randall shoots and Laura-Lee writes down
all the data. There's the occasional discrepancy between the number of
shots Randall thinks he's taken and the number of shots we think we've
heard. 
<p>
Then we head back to camp early since there's two days worth of mud to
sieve. Randall shows us how to use the stack of sieves to filter the
mud into large and small components. Pretty soon we're covered in
mud. The sieves are weighed to get the proportion of different sized
particles, and a sub-sample is bagged to go back to Texas for detailed
analysis. 
<p>
For dinner I'm presented with a squash. Not something I've ever eaten
before. It's very sweet, and that's unusual for a main course
dish. Rebecca and Lori are concerned that I don't like it, but if I
didn't like it I wouldn't eat it. My mother knows that.
<p>
There's deep philosophical conversation until very late. It's nearly
midnight when we all crawl back down from the cabin to the tents and
get some sleep. 

-- 2 Aug --
== Mud, mud, glorious mud, and a walk in the forest ==
Its up and breakfast as usual. Today we're out on Fred's boat doing
bottom  grab sampling. We use the GPS to get onto the station and
deploy the grab. The first few grabs go okay with Bruce on the line 
but then it fails to close up at all when Fred has a go. And
again. And again. He tries dropping the weight onto the grab from
about a foot up, and it triggers fine. He drops it in the water again,
hurls the messenger down, and pulls it back up. It still hasn't
grabbed. 
<p>
So I have a go. And it fails twice. This is getting infuriating. We
put Bruce on the rope and we finally get a sample. We let Bruce do all
the work from then on! I'm busy coiling the rope, and Laura-Lee does
the bagging and recording. Fred does his best to keep us on the GPS
station point.
<p>
Its another glorious sunny day, so we amble back slowly for lunch and
stop to watch some otters on the way.
<p>
After lunch we have Rebecca steering. She's getting used to handling
the boat. We see a Mom and Pup pair diving and feeding so we radio the
other boat to put them on to it. 
<p>
We carry on with the bottom sampling. Laura-Lee is clearly enjoying
the mud - she now not only has samples in the zip-loc bag, but also
over her white t-shirt. She writes 'MUD' in big letters across it, and
leaves a couple of hand-prints. I join in by doing warpaint stripes
across my face. 
<p>
At 5pm we make for a rocky shore and get off the boat to hike the
short distance back to the cove. I have the coordinates of the camp in
my GPS so I know how far it is! There's plenty of bear scat in the
forest. Delicate flowers grow on the wet bog. We emerge from the woods
to the beach in sight of the camp and stroll along the shaley sand
past a few cabins and back to the tents.
<p>
Randall has been over at Fred's parent's cabin sipping gin. It's a
hard life for a Principal Investigator. He turns up at our camp and we
unload the mud samples and equipment. I have a quick wash in the cold
mountain water from the hose at the beach. I wash my mud off, but
Laura-Lee is treasuring hers.
<p>
I'm filled with pasta and sauce for dinner, topped off with delicious
bread pudding. Randall cracks open the cheap brandy - in a plastic
bottle - to pour on top. He and Fred discuss the merits of generators
as the data is entered. 

-- 3 Aug --
== Blondes and bears ==
We're now well into the morning routine. Today my team is on the boat
with Randall, doing photo-identification work. We see a very blonde
otter and a mum with a golden pup. In all we photograph 16 hopefully
different otters. Randall takes to a small inlet lagoon where he once
kept 6 otters captive for a month to study their habits. We wander
around for a bit and Bruce nearly falls in when pushing us off. 
<p>
We get back to the cabin for a burrito lunch. Then its off again - we
follow a couple of otters including a female with a pup. She does
about a dozen dives which we time and note. We head up the bay but are
distracted by a brown bear on the shore. A black bear appears as we
try and find the brown one. He disappears into the woods and we head
back to camp.
<p>
Before dinner we do some more filtering of grab samples. Its mostly
mud this time. I'm filled with pasta for dinner while the others tuck
into chili. There's much debate into the evening as to what time to
start tomorrow. Our heads hit the pillows about 10pm.

-- 4 Aug --
== Exploring the shore, and a surprise visitor == 
Sometime in the night I'm awakened by a noise outside. The
high-pitched squeal of a baby otter is now a familiar noise to us, but
not in the cove. There must be a mother feeding there. I listen to its
calls for a while - they start when mother dives, and stop when she
returns with a splash and hopefully a morsel for baby. I fall asleep
to the calls.
<p>
Its a slightly cloudy morning as we get up. Today its an easy day
visiting the tide pools. I'm in the whaler with Laura-lee, Diane and
Jim with Lori at the helm. For our first stop we bob alongside a rock
wall where starfish cling and a small worm intrigues Rebecca. Next we
head along the coast to Sheep Point where we get out for a wander
round. It is hard not to tread on the starfish that litter the
rocks. Lori points out the various species. She shows us one that has
reversed its stomach to digest some unfortunate prey. Fred picks up a
crab, which promptly sheds one of its legs to escape, and runs away
seeming none the worse for losing a limb. Fred is left holding the
leg. Someone spots an eagle's nest, and we watch the adults return to
the young. Beyond the tree we see a very blonde otter with a pup,
feeding in the still waters of the point. 
<p>
As we head off, there's a noise. The tide had risen as we wandered and
covered the anchor, which we'd forgotten to lift. It wrapped around
the propeller. We free it up and head off, promising not to tell Randall.
<p>
Back at the cabin we have an early lunch and then head out with Fred
to do some more sampling, stopping to film some otters on the way out
to the site. The wind picks up and the water gets a bit choppy. We get
soaked heading back. The samples get sieved and bagged on the shore. 
We all sit in the cabin and snack as dinner is prepared - its curry
night. Not quite authentic but great nevertheless.
<p>
As we're sitting digesting dinner there's someone at the door. It's
Sonya. She's a journalist from Anchorage. With her is Mark King, a
local fisherman who has brought her out from Cordova in his boat. . He's a friend of
Fred's, but then Cordova is a small town where I guess everyone knows
everyone else. 
<p>
Sonya has arrived a day early. Randall was expecting her
tomorrow. She's writing a piece on the Earthwatch project. Armed with
her minidisc recorder she's going to be taking notes and talking to us
while observing our work. Tonight she is treated to Randall and Mark
discussing otter predation and mortality. Mark is an Eyak native who
has lived here all his life. The talk continues into the night as we
head off down to the tent for bed.

-- 5 Aug --
== Counting the otters ==
 We wake up to the sound of raindrops on the tent. There's a fairly
gentle rain coming down. Discussion over breakfast is on what we are
doing today. The original plan was to do the shoreline survey, but
that has to be done at high tide. Someone misread the tide tables and
high tide is almost gone. So we're going to do some more grab
samples. And then another change of plan. Its now census day for the
otters.
<p>
Randall explains the census process. Two boats will set off in
parallel both one-third the width of the bay from the shore. In one
boat there will be two observers on one side scanning the water from
boat to shore. On the other boat there are two observers on each side
scanning the water, so that the whole bay is covered. Each observer
calls each otter they see, and the numbers are recorded by people with
notebooks and pens at the ready. We are to count single otters and
otters with pups separately, so that Randall can compute the number of
animals at the end of the day. 
<p>
I'm in the skiff with Laura-Lee, Bruce, and Fred. Everyone else is on
the other boat with Randall. For the first time on this trip I get to
see the right arm of Simpson Bay. Here we make our first census pass,
from the head of the bay out to open water. We loop out at into open
water and head back into the left arm. Randall and Fred are in radio
contact to try and stop us double-counting otters in `disputed' waters
between the two boats. I personally count about fifty animals. 
<p>
We head back to the cabin for lunch, which for me consists of Friday's
left-over pasta. Randall tots up the census forms and declares a grand
total of 224 otters. The figure has increased with each team during
the summer.
<p>
After lunch we're on the photo-id boat with Randall, and we also have
Sonya and Rebecca on board, so its a bit more crowded than
usual. Randall takes us back to the right arm of the bay and up to the
lagoon at the far end. Here we spot an otter diving and crunching
mussels in his powerful jaws. We watch him feed for over an hour,
timing his dives and noting his food - mussels, mussels, and more
mussels. 
<p>
Happy that this fellow is now well documented we cross the bay so
Randall can show us a place called `Hole-In-The-Wall'. Its a narrow
channel that leads to what seems like an enclosed lake. This is where
Randall claims to have seen wolverines - something Fred doubts and
attributes to alcohol or wishful thinking on Randall's part. We see
exactly no wolverines. I'm not even sure what they look like.
<p>
There are no otters in Hole In The Wall, only jumping salmon, so we
head back to base and help out with the sample sieving that the others
are getting on with. There's a lot of interesting life coming up from
the bottom, including a sea cucumber, worms, and a brachiopod that intrigues
Randall. He tells us all about this primitive shell and how it feeds,
standing on the bottom on a stalk and filter feeding.
<p>
Sonya is interviewing people and so she gets my life story - or at
least the parts that relate to otters. I tell her how I first saw them
in California and knew that I wanted to work with them at some point. 
<p>
The cloud has now cleared and its a beautiful sunny evening. Some
stir-fried vegetables are produced for dinner and its still early
evening, so the instruments come out again and Fred and I play for the
captive audience until 10pm. We set our alarms for 7.15 to catch the
low tide tomorrow for the shoreline survey.

-- 6 Aug --
== Walking the shore and grabbing the bottom again ==
An early start for the shoreline survey. Randall explains how we are
to document the shore between low and high tide marks using cameras
and GPS units to record features. We take the boat out to the next
stretch of coast to survey, in the left fork of Simpson Bay. I'm using
my GPS to give coordinates to LauraLee who is note-taking at
first. Randall strolls along, describing the mud, the sand, and the
rocky substrate. There's lots of mud. LauraLee sits down in it at one
point. It grabs Bruce's boots and he walks right out of them. Diane
poses as Miss Rocky Substrate 2001. 
<p>
We wander the shore, taking pictures looking along and back every so
often, and marking notable features such as rocks with GPS
readings. We find lots of mussels much like what yesterday's otter
must have been feeding on. They are hard to remove from the rocks, and
we marvel at the otter's ability.
<p>
After a couple of miles on foot Fred shows us a small spring of
wonderful cool fresh water, which we name Fred's Fountain. By now its
lunchtime to we head back to camp, and Fred stops at every otter we
see so I can get some more film and Bruce can take some photographs.
As we get into Alice Cove we see Barney waving to us on the far
shore. Fred takes the skiff over and Barney shows off his catch - a
halibut ready for the pot, given a large enough pot! He offers to
bring some over for tea tonight.
<p>
We have a very lazy lunch - I while away the time balancing rocks on
the shore while some of the others relax on the sun lounger that forms
'Club Med' for us. Randall is probably having a siesta up in the
cabin. It has been a warm and sunny day. 
<p>

Eventually we get some energy back and head up with Fred to the left
side of the right arm of Simpson Bay where we saw the otter
yesterday. Randall wants to see what the bottom is like where the
animal was feeding. We take some bottom samples while Randall's crew
drop the camera down and unsurprisingly see lots of mussels. 
<p>
While we work another boat with a small family on board zooms past us
into the lagoon, and five minutes later zooms back again. We head up
into the lagoon to see if anything is going on, and because Randall
wants to pick berries.
<p>
Some zip-loc bags intended for mud samples are requisitioned as berry
bags. People get down to the important business of picking fruit once
Randall has told us what the best ones look like. Fred suggests we
wander upstream to a waterfall he knows, but a short way there he
spies some fresh bear prints. The bear may not be too happy about us
taking his fruit. We walk back to get some more berries. Several
people have full bags now, and Randall is king of the berry pickers.
<p>
We take the boats back out of the lagoon and now there is an otter
diving and feeding right where we were doing the survey earlier. Its
probably the same otter that we saw yesterday. He dives down, pops up,
and crunches mussels, turning over to get more out of the pockets of
skin under his arms, and crunching them. Then its down again for a few
more armfuls. Randall gets some pictures. By now its late and time to
get home. 
<p>
Its gone six before we arrive back, and dinner is getting
ready. Barney's fish is cooking and the berries we picked have been
turned into a fruit cobbler. That means lots of washing up for us.
<p>
There's some excitement later in the evening as Mark, the fisherman
who brought Sonya here, arrives to tell us of a ship sinking out in
the bay. We listen in to the emergency channel on the shortwave and
watch a rescue helicopter heading out. After a while it seems the crew
are all okay. We head down to the tents on the shore and Mark's boat
is moored there, where he stays for the night.

-- 7 Aug --
== Bear hunting and dead salmon ==
Today its our last day, and Randall is going to take us up Sheep
Bay. We rise about 8 and have breakfast. At 9.30 we're heading out in
the skiff round Sheep Point and into Sheep Bay. The scenery is of more
high mountains as a backdrop to forests down to the waterline. There's
a few otters, but it doesn't seem as busy with them as Simpson Bay
is. High up above the treeline we spot some mountain goats that give
Sheep Bay its slightly inappropriate name.

<p>
We pull over at a small creek and Fred strides off. He returns with
news that there's a bear just around the corner. We try and sneak up
on it, bit it hears us and strolls off into the woods, looking back as
it disappears. 
<p>
Across the other side of the bay is a large waterfall, so we travel
over there and pull up the boats. There's the rusting remnants of an
old saw mill here. A creek washes out of a gully in the hillside and
flows into the bay. Salmon swim in the shallows. We scramble up
towards the waterfall, but I have to stop for fear of water in my
camera. Randall grabs a dead salmon out of the water and throws it at
Diane. We see lots of signs of bears having been eating salmon -
there's bear scat and dead salmon aplenty.
<p>
Now we're on our way to the head of the bay to look for brown
bears. We pitch up on the bank and walk quietly towards where the main
river flows into the bay. There are lots of seagulls flying around,
and bald eagles soaring. In the water, and on the ground where the
tide has receded, are hundreds of dead salmon, rotting away and
attracting the gulls. A few live salmon thrash around in the shallows
as the dead float past. Fred thinks we've no chance of seeing bears at
this time, so we walk back to the boats and get back to Alice
Cove.
<p>
 Its now about 3pm so we have a late lunch, and then at 5pm
Randall gives us his talk on marine mammals. He can't get the
projector to work so we all watch the laptop screen. We lounge around
until dinner is served about 7pm. Barney and Maxine appear with a
special treat - home-made cookies. Its Max's special disappearing
cookie recipe. After some mexican food for dinner I show some footage 
I've shot to my new friends, since I've got plenty of battery life
left. We eat, drink, and be merry for tomorrow we fly away.
<p>

-- 8 Aug --
== On the Dancing Bear to Cordova, and back to Seattle == 
Everybody gets up and packs their gear away. The British Airways
toothbrush that I gave to Laura on the first day - she forgot hers -
has been brushed into oblivion. Its overcast but not that
gloomy, and there's no fog so the floatplanes should have no problem
getting here. We have our last breakfast in the cabin at about
8.30. It seems very quiet and subdued. I don't think any of the
volunteers can believe the time has gone.
<p>
Now there's a logistics problem. Because of the arrival of Sonya we
need to get seven people back to Cordova. But the float planes only
take three people each. After some negotiation a solution is achieved
- since I'm going on a later plane, I can stay a bit longer and head
into Cordova on the Dancing Bear with Fred and Max. I'm happy with
this, since it gives me longer in Alice Cove, and also means I get a
ride on Fred's boat. He's also going to drive me to the airport.
<p>
The float planes arrive. Jim, Bruce, and Sonya take the first one, and
its all hugs and handshakes as we part. The engine roars and they're
out of the Cove. We next see them in the air and on their
way. LauraLee, Laura, and Diane get on the second plane. The pilot is
the same guy who brought us here. We say our bye-byes and soon they're
off too.
<p>
There's some tidying up to do so I try and help Rebecca with it, but
she knows what she's doing and I'm probably only getting in the way. I
sit up in the cabin and rest a while as Lori does the vacuum cleaning
and Randall grinds fresh coffee. He's also backing up this weeks data
to CDROM. Fred is over on the Dancing Bear sorting things out. 
<p>
Randall cooks up some burritos for lunch, my last meal in the cabin. I
say my goodbyes to Randall, Lori and Rebecca at the cabin and head down
to the shore. Fred takes me and my bags on his small inflatable boat
out to the Dancing Bear, where I climb aboard. Barney arrives and
Maxine gets in. Fred fires up the engine and takes the boat out of the
cove.
<p>
We climb up to the top deck and watch the sea. There's a few otters
about and its great to get a different view. From this angle you can
see them underwater with their coats shimmering with all the trapped
air, leaving a stream of bubbles behind them.
<p>
Soot from the engine is speckling my coat. Maxine hands out Hershey's
Chocolate Kisses. 
<p>
It takes about 40 minutes to get to Cordova. First we see it in the
distance as a few buildings on the shore, and then with a great cloud
of seagulls in front of us, swarming round the fish canning plant. We
get through the gulls without getting bombed, and Fred takes the boat
into the harbour and stops at his dock. We get off and head for Fred's
car.
<p>
Fred drops Maxine off at a friend's house and then takes me out to the
airport. I have plenty of time before my flight - its actually the
same plane that took the others but it has been to Anchorage and back
by the time I get it. I say my thank-yous and goodbyes to Fred, and he
drives off. I'm back on my own again.
<p>
I'm sitting in the lounge next to the coke and candy machine. There in
the tray of the candy machine is an unclaimed Snickers bar. This makes
me smile, since for the past ten days we've been on strict Snickers
rations in the hut. I leave it for some children to find later.
<p>
With half and hour to the plane's arrival a few people start to
arrive. It seems a lot of them have been here hunting and fishing,
since they have guns and fishing rods to check in. There are cooler
boxes that must be packed full of salmon judging by the weight.
<p>
The plane arrives on time, and we all get on. I relax and listen to
the conversation going on behind me. One guy had got to Cordova late,
and offered someone a cooler of salmon to get him to the airport in
time. 
<p>
As the sun sinks we get stunning views of the high Alaskan mountains,
turning pink and purple. The glaciers shimmer below us. We stop at
Yakutat and Juneau, arriving at Seattle in darkness. Dave Howes meets
me at the baggage claim, and we drive back to his house where I sleep
on a proper mattress under a real roof for the first time in 10 days.

