7 Aug --
== Bear hunting and dead salmon ==
Today its our last day, and Randall is going to take us up Sheep
Bay. We rise about 8 and have breakfast. At 9.30 we're heading out in
the skiff round Sheep Point and into Sheep Bay. The scenery is of more
high mountains as a backdrop to forests down to the waterline. There's
a few otters, but it doesn't seem as busy with them as Simpson Bay
is. High up above the treeline we spot some mountain goats that give
Sheep Bay its slightly inappropriate name.

<p>
We pull over at a small creek and Fred strides off. He returns with
news that there's a bear just around the corner. We try and sneak up
on it, bit it hears us and strolls off into the woods, looking back as
it disappears. 
<p>
Across the other side of the bay is a large waterfall, so we travel
over there and pull up the boats. There's the rusting remnants of an
old saw mill here. A creek washes out of a gully in the hillside and
flows into the bay. Salmon swim in the shallows. We scramble up
towards the waterfall, but I have to stop for fear of water in my
camera. Randall grabs a dead salmon out of the water and throws it at
Diane. We see lots of signs of bears having been eating salmon -
there's bear scat and dead salmon aplenty.
<p>
Now we're on our way to the head of the bay to look for brown
bears. We pitch up on the bank and walk quietly towards where the main
river flows into the bay. There are lots of seagulls flying around,
and bald eagles soaring. In the water, and on the ground where the
tide has receded, are hundreds of dead salmon, rotting away and
attracting the gulls. A few live salmon thrash around in the shallows
as the dead float past. Fred thinks we've no chance of seeing bears at
this time, so we walk back to the boats and get back to Alice
Cove.
<p>
 Its now about 3pm so we have a late lunch, and then at 5pm
Randall gives us his talk on marine mammals. He can't get the
projector to work so we all watch the laptop screen. We lounge around
until dinner is served about 7pm. Barney and Maxine appear with a
special treat - home-made cookies. Its Max's special disappearing
cookie recipe. After some mexican food for dinner I show some footage 
I've shot to my new friends, since I've got plenty of battery life
left. We eat, drink, and be merry for tomorrow we fly away.
<p>

